.TH ALOHA 1 "2026-04-25" "aloha 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
aloha \- HTTP server and reverse proxy
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aloha
.RB [ \-c
.IR file ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aloha
is a lightweight HTTP/HTTPS server and reverse proxy.
It supports virtual host routing, automatic TLS via Let\(aqs Encrypt,
static file serving, HTTP redirects, and configurable timeouts.
.PP
Configuration is read from a KDL file (default:
.I aloha.kdl
in the working directory).
All sockets are bound before privileges are dropped, so
.B aloha
can be started as root to bind ports 80 and 443 and will then switch
to an unprivileged user as specified in the configuration.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " file" ", " \-\-config " file"
Read configuration from
.I file
instead of the default
.IR aloha.kdl .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is written in KDL.
The top-level nodes are:
.PP
.RS 4
.TP
.B server
Global settings: privilege drop user/group, state directory for ACME
certificates, and global TLS defaults.
.TP
.B listener
Opens a TCP socket (via
.B bind
or an inherited file descriptor via
.BR fd )
and begins accepting connections.
Each listener optionally has a
.B tls
child (self-signed, PEM file, or ACME/Let\(aqs Encrypt)
and a
.B timeouts
child.
.TP
.B vhost
Maps one or more hostnames to URL routing rules.
Names are matched against the
.B Host
request header; a leading
.B ~
treats the name as a regular expression.
.TP
.B location
Maps a URL path prefix to a handler:
.BR static ,
.BR proxy ,
.BR redirect ,
or
.BR fastcgi .
.RE
.PP
See
.BR aloha.kdl (5)
for the full configuration reference.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/aloha.kdl
Default system-wide configuration file when
.B aloha
is installed as a service.
.TP
.I /var/lib/aloha/
Default state directory for ACME account keys and issued certificates
(set via
.B server state\-dir
in the configuration).
.TP
.I /var/www/aloha/
Default document root served by the packaged configuration.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls log verbosity.
The default is
.BR aloha=info .
Examples:
.BR aloha=debug ,
.BR aloha=trace .
See
.UR https://docs.rs/tracing\-subscriber/latest/tracing_subscriber/filter/struct.EnvFilter.html
.UE
for the full filter syntax.
.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.BR SIGINT ", " SIGTERM
Initiates shutdown.
In-flight requests are aborted; graceful drain is not yet implemented.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start with the default configuration file in the current directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
aloha
.EE
.RE
.PP
Start with an explicit configuration file:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
aloha \-\-config /etc/aloha.kdl
.EE
.RE
.PP
Run with debug logging enabled:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
RUST_LOG=aloha=debug aloha \-\-config /etc/aloha.kdl
.EE
.RE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR kdl (5)
.PP
Full configuration reference:
.UR https://github.com/mwp/aloha/blob/main/CONFIGURATION.md
.UE
.
.SH BUGS
Graceful shutdown (draining in-flight requests) is not yet implemented.
The reverse proxy and FastCGI handlers are stubs that return 502.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Michael Paddon <6d7770@gmail.com>
